.\" Comprehensive manpage for the powerliners binary suite (5 binaries).
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/powerliners to correct errors or omissions.
.TH POWERLINEALL 1 "2026-05-30" "powerliners 0.2.9" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
powerlineall \- comprehensive reference for the powerliners 5-binary suite (powerline / powerline-daemon / powerline-config / powerline-render / powerline-lint)
.SH OVERVIEW
.B powerliners
is a 1:1 Rust port of the upstream Python
.B powerline-status
project. It ships five cooperating binaries that together replace the
entire Python implementation while preserving the existing
.B ~/.config/powerline/
JSON config tree byte-for-byte.
.PP
This manpage documents the suite as a whole: invocation order, wire
protocol between client and daemon, config-lookup cascade, theme
grammar, segment dispatch, and the rendering pipeline. For individual
binaries see the per-binary
.BR powerline (1),
.BR powerline-daemon (1),
.BR powerline-render (1),
.BR powerline-config (1),
.BR powerline-lint (1)
pages.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B powerline
[\fB\-\-socket\fR \fIPATH\fR]
\fIEXT\fR
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.PP
.B powerline-daemon
[\fB\-\-foreground\fR | \fB\-\-quiet\fR | \fB\-\-replace\fR | \fB\-\-kill\fR]
[\fB\-\-socket\fR \fIPATH\fR]
.PP
.B powerline-render
\fIEXT\fR
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.PP
.B powerline-config
\fISUBCOMMAND\fR
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.PP
.B powerline-lint
[\fB\-p\fR \fIPATH\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SH "1.  ARCHITECTURE"
.B powerliners
splits the rendering pipeline into a long-lived daemon and a thin
fork-on-demand client:
.IP \(bu 2
.B powerline-daemon
\(em a single Unix-socket server per UID. Loads the JSON config tree
once, instantiates segment classes once, holds the theme dictionaries
and color palettes in memory.
.IP \(bu 2
.B powerline
\(em the lightweight client. Forwards \fIargv\fR + \fIcwd\fR + the
environment to the daemon over a Unix socket and copies the rendered
statusline to stdout. Falls back to
.B powerline-render
when the daemon is unreachable.
.IP \(bu 2
.B powerline-render
\(em the direct-render fallback. Same render path as the daemon but
no socket; pays the full config-load cost on every invocation.
.IP \(bu 2
.B powerline-config
\(em config-introspection helper. Used by shell init scripts to locate
the right
.B powerline.sh
bindings to source.
.IP \(bu 2
.B powerline-lint
\(em static-analysis tool. Validates
.B config.json
+ theme JSON for unknown segment names, missing color references,
malformed
.B before/after
formatting strings, and other authoring errors.
.SH "2.  WIRE PROTOCOL"
The
.B powerline
client and the
.B powerline-daemon
server communicate over an abstract or filesystem Unix socket. The
wire format mirrors the upstream C client
.RB ( vendor/powerline/client/powerline.c
lines 126\-148):
.PP
.RS
.nf
hex(argc-1) "\\0" argv[0] "\\0" argv[1] "\\0" ... cwd "\\0" env[0] "\\0" ... "\\0\\0"
.fi
.RE
.PP
The server demarshals the request, dispatches to the appropriate
.B Powerline.<ext>
extension, and writes the rendered byte stream back. Cross\(hyversion
clients and servers interop as long as the wire format is preserved.
.SH "3.  SOCKET PATHS"
.TP
.B /tmp/powerline-ipc-<uid>
Filesystem socket (macOS, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD).
.TP
.B \\0powerline-ipc-<uid>
Abstract socket (Linux). Has no filesystem entry; appears only in
.BR ss (8) " -x"
and
.BR lsof (8) " -U"
under the leading NUL marker. Survives
.B /tmp
cleanup races.
.PP
Both can be overridden with
.B \-\-socket
.IR PATH .
.SH "4.  CONFIG CASCADE"
.B powerline-render
and
.B powerline-daemon
search for
.B config.json
+ theme JSON in this order (first hit wins per key):
.IP 1. 4
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/powerline/
(falls back to
.BR ~/.config/powerline/ ).
.IP 2. 4
.B $POWERLINE_CONFIG_PATHS
\(em colon-separated user override roots.
.IP 3. 4
.B /etc/powerline/
\(em system\(hywide overrides.
.IP 4. 4
The bundled defaults shipped with the
.B powerliners
package itself
.RB ( vendor/powerline/powerline/config_files/ ).
.PP
Per-key merging follows the upstream Python
.B mergedicts
semantics: deep dictionary merge, REMOVE sentinel for explicit deletion,
nested\(hylist append.
.SH "5.  THEME GRAMMAR"
A theme JSON file declares
.IR segments :
left / right list of segment specs, each segment naming a Python\(hystyle
.B segment_data
function (mapped in the Rust port to a dispatch table of
.B fn(args: &Map<String, Value>, info: &Map<String, Value>) -> Option<Value>
adapters). The segment returns a list of
.B highlight_groups
+ contents tuples. The theme's
.B segment_data
section can override
.B args ,
.BR contents ,
.BR before / after ,
or the
.B priority
for any segment by key.
.PP
Color palettes live in
.BR colors.json ;
named colors are referenced from
.B colorschemes/<ext>.json
which maps highlight\(hygroup names to
.B fg / bg / attrs
triples. The theme grammar is the same as upstream and any existing
.B ~/.config/powerline/
tree works unchanged.
.SH "6.  SEGMENT DISPATCH"
Segments fall into three categories:
.TP
.B common
Cross\(hyextension segments (battery, network, weather, mail, hostname,
cwd, vcs branch). Located under
.BR src/ported/segments/common/ .
.TP
.B shell
Shell\(hyspecific segments (
.BR last_status ,
.BR last_pipe_status ,
.BR jobnum ,
.BR continuation_marker ).
.TP
.B tmux
Tmux\(hyspecific segments (
.BR session_name ,
.BR window_index ,
.BR pane_count ).
.PP
The
.B player
segment family additionally supports per-player adapters (spotify, itunes,
mocp, mpd, cmus, rhythmbox, clementine) through a common
.B PlayerSegment
base, faithfully mirroring upstream's class hierarchy.
.SH "7.  DAEMON LIFECYCLE"
.B powerline-daemon
defaults to forking into the background after binding the socket
.RB ( "powerline-daemon &"
in
.BR ~/.profile ),
re\(hyexecs on
.B SIGHUP
(to pick up config changes without dropping the socket), and exits
cleanly on
.BR SIGTERM .
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-foreground
keeps the daemon attached to the terminal (useful for systemd
.B Type=simple
units).
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-replace
kills any existing daemon on the same socket and takes over.
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-kill
sends SIGTERM to the running daemon and exits.
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-\-quiet
suppresses startup banner / log output (analogous to upstream).
.SH "8.  INVOCATION FROM SHELLS"
.SS zsh
.RS
.nf
function powerline_precmd() {
    PS1="$(powerline shell left \\
        --last-exit-code=$? \\
        --jobnum=$(jobs -p | wc -l))"
}
precmd_functions+=(powerline_precmd)
.fi
.RE
.SS bash
.RS
.nf
PROMPT_COMMAND='PS1="$(powerline shell left \\
    --last-exit-code=$? \\
    --jobnum=$(jobs -p | wc -l))"'
.fi
.RE
.SS tmux
.RS
.nf
set -g status-interval 2
set -g status-left  "#(powerline tmux left)"
set -g status-right "#(powerline tmux right)"
set -g status-style "bg=colour234,fg=colour231"
.fi
.RE
.SS vim
.RS
.nf
" let g:powerline_pycmd = 'py3'
set rtp+=~/.local/lib/python3.X/site-packages/powerline/bindings/vim/
set laststatus=2
.fi
.RE
Vim integration retains the Python plumbing because vim's
.B :python
host is the only IPC path for inline script execution; the rendered
content still comes from the
.B powerline
binary, just via a thin Python helper.
.SH "9.  CONFIG INTROSPECTION"
.B powerline-config
subcommands:
.TP
.B tmux setup
Print the
.B tmux source-file
fragment to wire powerline statusline + status\(hyleft / right + window
status formats. Used by
.B powerline.sh
during shell init.
.TP
.B tmux source
Print the path to the active
.B powerline.tmux
fragment so downstream
.B source-file
directives can pick it up.
.TP
.B shell command
Print the shell command that should be set as
.B $POWERLINE_COMMAND
\(em useful for shells whose init script needs to detect the binary.
.TP
.B shell uses [SEGMENT]
Exit 0 iff
.I SEGMENT
is referenced from any active theme. Used to gate optional segment
setup (e.g. skip
.B powerline.sh
sourcing of git completion when no git segment is active).
.SH "10.  LINTING"
.B powerline-lint
walks the config + theme cascade and reports:
.IP \(bu 2
Unknown segment function names referenced from themes.
.IP \(bu 2
Missing color names referenced from
.BR colorschemes / .
.IP \(bu 2
Malformed
.BR before / after / contents
format strings (unbalanced braces, unknown variable references).
.IP \(bu 2
Type errors in JSON keys (e.g. a string where an integer
.B priority
is required).
.IP \(bu 2
Tuple\(hylength bounds violations (e.g. a 1\(hyelement tuple where 2\(hyelements are required).
.SH "11.  ENVIRONMENT"
.TP
.B POWERLINE_COMMAND
The command invoked by shell + tmux integrations. Set to
.B powerline
to use this native binary.
.TP
.B POWERLINE_CONFIG_PATHS
Colon\(hyseparated config search roots.
.TP
.B POWERLINE_CONFIG_OVERRIDES
.B key=value
overrides applied to the resolved config dict per extension.
.TP
.B POWERLINE_NO_DAEMON
If set, the
.B powerline
client skips the daemon socket and execs
.B powerline-render
directly. Useful when debugging daemon startup races.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
User config root; falls back to
.B ~/.config
if unset.
.SH "12.  FILES"
.TP
.B ~/.config/powerline/config.json
User config root.
.TP
.B ~/.config/powerline/themes/<ext>/
Per\(hyextension theme JSON files.
.TP
.B ~/.config/powerline/colorschemes/<ext>.json
Highlight\(hygroup color mappings.
.TP
.B ~/.config/powerline/colors.json
Named color palette.
.TP
.B /tmp/powerline-ipc-<uid>
Daemon Unix socket (macOS / BSD).
.TP
.B \\0powerline-ipc-<uid>
Daemon Unix socket (Linux abstract).
.TP
.B /etc/powerline/
System\(hywide config overrides.
.SH "13.  EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Successful render (
.B powerline ,
.BR powerline-render ).
.TP
.B 0
Daemon started successfully (
.BR powerline-daemon ).
.TP
.B 0
Lint clean (
.BR powerline-lint ).
.TP
.B 1
Daemon unreachable AND fallback failed (
.BR powerline ).
.TP
.B 2
Config or theme lint errors (
.BR powerline-lint ).
.TP
.B 64
Bad invocation / unrecognized argument.
.SH "14.  PERFORMANCE NOTES"
The Python upstream pays a ~50\(en150 ms interpreter import tax on every
render. Because tmux re\(hyrenders the statusline at
.B status-interval
and shell prompts re\(hyrender on every keystroke (with
.B precmd
hooks fired), the import tax compounds into a noticeable interactive
latency.
.PP
.B powerliners
is a single static binary: zero\(hyimport, zero\(hyGC, no GIL. With a warm
.B powerline-daemon
the per\(hyrender cost is dominated by the socket roundtrip
(typically <500 \(*ms). Without the daemon,
.B powerline-render
pays a one\(hytime config\(hyload cost (~10 ms) and emits in <2 ms thereafter.
.SH "15.  SEE ALSO"
.BR powerline (1),
.BR powerline-daemon (1),
.BR powerline-render (1),
.BR powerline-config (1),
.BR powerline-lint (1),
.BR tmux (1),
.BR zsh (1),
.BR bash (1),
.BR vim (1)
.PP
Upstream Python
.B powerline-status :
.UR https://powerline.readthedocs.io
.UE .
.PP
Source / issues:
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/powerliners
.UE .
.SH AUTHORS
MenkeTechnologies. 1:1 Rust port of the upstream Python
.B powerline-status
project (Kim Silkebækken et al.).
.SH BUGS
Report at
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/powerliners/issues
.UE .
