.\" Manpage for powerline (powerliners).
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/powerliners to correct errors or omissions.
.TH POWERLINE 1 "2026-05-30" "powerliners 0.2.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
powerline \- native Rust statusline / prompt client (zero-Python powerline-status drop-in)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B powerline
[\fB\-\-socket\fR \fIPATH\fR]
\fIEXT\fR
[\fIARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B powerline
is the native Rust client for the powerline statusline / prompt rendering
system. It is a 1:1 port of upstream's
.B vendor/powerline/client/powerline.c
and is invoked by tmux, zsh, bash, vim, and ipython through the
.B $POWERLINE_COMMAND
environment variable.
.PP
On invocation,
.B powerline
builds a wire request from \fIargv\fR, the current working directory, and
the inherited environment, sends it over a Unix socket to a running
.BR powerline-daemon (1),
and copies the rendered statusline / prompt response to standard output.
If the daemon socket is not reachable it execs
.BR powerline-render (1)
as a fallback, mirroring the upstream C client behavior.
.PP
This native binary replaces the Python
.B powerline
shell command. There is no Python interpreter import cost, no GIL, and
no GC pause; render is sub\(hymillisecond on a warm daemon.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-socket " " \fIPATH\fR
Override the default Unix-socket path used to reach
.BR powerline-daemon (1).
Must appear as the
.B first
argument (before \fIEXT\fR), per the C-client convention. When absent,
the platform-specific default is used (see
.B FILES
below).
.PP
All other \fIARGS\fR after \fIEXT\fR are forwarded verbatim to the
daemon. See
.BR powerline-render (1)
for the canonical list of extension-targeted arguments.
.SH EXTENSIONS
\fIEXT\fR selects which powerline extension to render. Stock extensions:
.TP
.B tmux
Tmux statusline segments.
.TP
.B shell
Shell prompt (zsh, bash continuation, fish, etc.); subtypes pass through
the next arg (\fBleft\fR, \fBright\fR, \fBcontinuation\fR).
.TP
.B vim
Vim statusline / tabline; only used via the Python ipython binding.
.TP
.B ipython
IPython prompt / continuation.
.TP
.B wm
i3 / awesome / qtile widget binding.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B POWERLINE_COMMAND
The command that shell integrations invoke to render their prompt. Set to
.B powerline
(this binary) once installed; existing setups that hardcode the upstream
Python shim continue to work transparently because the wire format is
identical.
.TP
.B POWERLINE_CONFIG_PATHS
Colon-separated list of directories searched for
.B config.json
and themes / colors / segments JSON. Mirrors upstream search order.
.TP
.B POWERLINE_CONFIG_OVERRIDES
Theme-override key=value pairs applied per-extension.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /tmp/powerline-ipc-<uid>
Filesystem Unix socket the daemon listens on (macOS, BSD).
.TP
.B \\0powerline-ipc-<uid>
Abstract Unix socket (Linux). Not visible via
.BR ls (1)
or
.BR fuser (1)
because it has no filesystem path.
.TP
.B ~/.config/powerline/config.json
User config root. Merged over the system / package defaults.
.TP
.B ~/.config/powerline/themes/
Per-extension theme directories (
.BR tmux/ ,
.BR shell/ ,
.BR vim/ ,
.BR ipython/ ).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful render (output written to stdout).
.TP
.B non-zero
Daemon unreachable AND fallback exec of
.BR powerline-render (1)
failed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Render the tmux statusline:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ powerline tmux statusline
.fi
.RE
.PP
Render the zsh left-prompt with the daemon running on a custom socket:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ powerline --socket /tmp/my-powerline shell left
.fi
.RE
.PP
Typical tmux integration (
.BR ~/.tmux.conf ):
.PP
.RS
.nf
set -g status-interval 2
set -g status-left "#(powerline tmux left)"
set -g status-right "#(powerline tmux right)"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Typical zsh integration (
.BR ~/.zshrc ):
.PP
.RS
.nf
function powerline_precmd() {
    PS1="$(powerline shell left --last-exit-code=$? --jobnum=$(jobs -p | wc -l))"
}
precmd_functions+=(powerline_precmd)
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR powerline-daemon (1),
.BR powerline-render (1),
.BR powerline-config (1),
.BR powerline-lint (1),
.BR tmux (1),
.BR zsh (1)
.PP
Upstream Python powerline-status:
.UR https://powerline.readthedocs.io
.UE .
.SH AUTHORS
MenkeTechnologies. 1:1 Rust port of the upstream Python
.B powerline-status
project by Kim Silkebækken et al.
.SH BUGS
Report at
.UR https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/powerliners/issues
.UE .
